[1] Among the thousands of titles that deal with fascism, there are a few worthwhile
exceptions that do not evade questions of political economy and class power, for
instance: Gaetano Salvemini, Under the Ax of Fascism (New York: Howard Fertig,
1969); Daniel Guerin, Fascism and Big Business (New York: Monad Press/
Pathfinder Press, 1973); James Pool and Suzanne Pool, Who Financed Hitler
(New York: Dial Press, 1978); Palmiro Togliatti, Lectures on Fascism (New York:
International Publishers, 1976); Franz Neumann, Behemoth (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1944); R. Palme Dutt, Fascism and Social Revolution (New York:
International Publisher, 1935).

[2] Between January and May 1921, "the fascists destroyed 120 labor headquarters,
attacked 243 socialist centers and other buildings, killed 202 workers (in addition
to 44 killed by the police and gendarmerie), and wounded 1,144." During this
time 2,240 workers were arrested and only 162 fascists. In the 1921-22 period up
to Mussolini's seizure of state power, "500 labor halls and cooperative stores were
burned, and 900 socialist municipalities were dissolved": Dutt, Fascism and Social
Revolution, 124.

[3] Earlier in 1924, Social Democratic officials in the Ministry of Interior used
Reichswehr and Free Corps fascist paramilitary troops to attack left-wing
demonstrators. They imprisoned seven thousand workers and suppressed
Communist party newspapers: Richard Plant, The Pink Triangle (New York:
Henry Holt, 1986), 47.

[4] This is not to gainsay that cultural differences can lead to important variations.
Consider, for instance, the horrific role played by anti-Semitism in Nazi Germany
as compared to fascist Italy.

[5] Simon Kuznets, "Qualitative Aspects of the Economic Growth of Nations"
Economic Development and Cultural Change, 5, no. 1, 1956, 5-94.

[6] Ex-leftist and reborn conservative Eugene Genovese (New Republic, 4/1/95)
eagerly leaped to the conclusion that it is a "nonsensical interpretation" to see
"fascism as a creature of big capital." Genovese was applauding Eric Hobsbawm,
who argued that the capitalist class was not the primary force behind fascism
in Spain. In response» Vicente Navarro (Monthly Review 1/96 and 4/96) noted
that the "major economic interests of Spain," assisted by at least one Texas oil
millionaire and other elements of international capital, did indeed finance
Franco's fascist invasion and coup against the Spanish Republic. A crucial source,
Navarro writes, was the financial empire of Joan March, founder of the Liberal
Party and owner of a liberal newspaper. Considered a modernizer and an
alternative to the oligarchic, land-based, reactionary sector of capital, March made
common cause with these same oligarchs once he saw that working-class parties
were gaining strength and his own economic interests were being affected by the
reformist Republic.

[7] There already was a stamp of von Hindenburg to honor his presidency. Old
Hindenburg, who had no love for Hitler, sarcastically said he would make Hitler
his postal minister, because "then he can lick my backside"

[8] Wulf Schwarzwaeller, The Unknown Hitler, 197

[9] Charles Higham, Trading with the Enemy (New York: Dell, 1983).

[10] George Mosse (ed.), Nazi Culture (New York: Grosset & Dunlap, 1966), 116-118.

[11] Richard Plant, The Pink Triangle, 91.

[12] Chomsky interviewed by Husayn Al-Kurdi, Perception, March/April 1996.

[13] Roy Palmer Domenico, Italian Fascists on Trial, 1943-1948 (Chapel Hill: Univer-
sity of North Carolina Press, 1991), passim. So in France, very few of the Vichy
collaborators were purged. "No one of any rank was seriously punished for his
or her role in the roundup and deportation of Jews to Nazi camps": Herbert
Lottman, The Purge (New York: William Morrow, 1986), 290. Much the same
can be said about Germany; see Ingo Muller, Hitlers Justice (Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1991), part 3, "The Aftermath" U.S. military author-
ities restored fascist collaborators to power in various Far East nations« In South
Korea, for instance, Koreans collaborators and the Japanese-trained police were
used to suppress left democratic forces. The South Korean Army was commanded
by officers who had served in the Imperial Japanese Army "and were proud of it."
Numbers of them had been guilty of war crimes in the Philippines and China:
Hugh Deane, "Korea, China and the United States: A Look Back," Monthly
Review, Feb. 1995, 20 and 23.

[14] After the war, Hermann Abs, head of the Deutsche Bank and in effect "Hitler's
paymaster," was hailed by David Rockefeller as "the most important banker of
our time." According to his New York Times obituary, Abs "played a dominant
role in West Germany's reconstruction after World War II." Neither the Times
nor Rockefeller said a word about Abs' Nazi connections, his banks predatory
incursions across Nazi occupied Europe, and his participation, as a board member
of I.G. Farben, in the use of slave labor at Auschwitz: Robert Carl Miller, Portland
Free Press, Sept/Oct 1994.

[15] Charles Higham, Trading with the Enemy.

[16] One of them, Boleslavs Maikovskis, a Latvian police chief who fled to West
Germany to escape Soviet war crimes investigations and then to the United
States, was heavily implicated in the Nazi slaughter of over two hundred Latvian
villagers. He served for a time on a Republican party subcommittee to re-elect
President Nixon, then fled back to Germany to avoid a belated U.S. war crimes
investigation, dying at the ripe old age of 92 (New York Times, 5/8/96). Nazi war
criminals have been aided by Western intelligence agencies, business interests, the
military, and even the Vatican. In October 1944, German paratroop commander
Major Walter Reder slaughtered 1,836 defenseless civilians in a village near
Bologna, Italy as a reprisal against Partisan activities. He was released from
prison in 1985, after Pope John Paul II, among others, made an appeal on his
behalf—over the strenuous protests of relatives of the victims.