PREFACE

This book invites those immersed in the prevailing orthodoxy of
"democratic capitalism" to entertain iconoclastic views, to question
the shibboleths of free-market mythology and the persistence of
both right and left anticommunism, and to consider anew, with a
receptive but not uncritical mind, the historic efforts of the much
maligned Reds and other revolutionaries.

The political orthodoxy that demonizes communism permeates the
entire political perspective. Even people on the Left have internalized
the liberal/conservative ideology that equates fascism and communism
as equally evil totalitaran twins, two major mass movements of the
twentieth century. This book attempts to show the enormous differ-
ences between fascism and communism both past and present, both in
theory and practice, especially in regard to questions of social equality,
private capital accumulation, and class interest.

The orthodox mythology also would have us believe that the
Western democracies (with the United States leading the way) have
opposed both totalitarian systems with equal vigor. In fact, U.S. lead-
ers have been dedicated above all to making the world safe for global
corporate investment and the private profit system. Pursuant of this
goal, they have used fascism to protect capitalism, while claiming to
be saving democracy from communism.

In the pages ahead I discuss how capitalism propagates and prof-
its from fascism, the value of revolution in the advancement of the
human condition, the causes and effects of the destruction of com-
munism, the continuing relevance of Marxism and class analysis,
and the heartless nature of corporate-class power.

Over a century ago, in his great work Les Misérables Victor Hugo
asked, "Will the future arrive?" He was thinking of a future of social
justice, free from the "terrible shadows" of oppression imposed by
the few upon the great mass of humankind. Of late, some scribes

have announced "the end of history" With the overthrow of com-
munism, the monumental struggle between alternative systems has
ended, they say. Capitalism's victory is total. No great transforma-
tions are in the offing. The global free market is here to stay. What
you see is what you are going to get, now and always. This time the
class struggle is definitely over. So Hugo s question is answered: the
future has indeed arrived, though not the one he had hoped for.

This intellectually anemic end-of-history theory was hailed as a
brilliant exegesis and accorded a generous reception by commenta-
tors and reviewers of the corporate-controlled media. It served the
official worldview perfectly well, saying what the higher circles had
been telling us for generations: that the struggle between classes is
not an everyday reality but an outdated notion, that an untrammeled
capitalism is here to stay now and forever, that the future belongs to
those who control the present.

But the question we really should be asking is, do we have a future
at all? More than ever, with the planet itself at stake, it becomes nec-
essary to impose a reality check on those who would plunder our
limited ecological resources in the pursuit of limitless profits, those
who would squander away our birthright and extinguish our liber-
ties in their uncompromising pursuit of self-gain.

History teaches us that all ruling elites try to portray themselves as
the natural and durable social order, even ones that are in serious cri-
sis, that threaten to devour their environmental base in order to con-
tinually recreate their hierarchal structure of power and privilege. And
all ruling elites are scornful and intolerant of alternative viewpoints.

Truth is an uncomfortable venue for those who pretend to serve
our society while in fact serving only themselves—at our expense. I
hope this effort will chip away at the Big Lie. The truth may not set
us free, as the Bible claims, but it is an important first step in that
direction.

—Michael Parenti